Ecological Methods
Peter Alan Henderson, Pisces Conservation Ltd and The University of Oxford, UK


##Intensive/Extensive 

Studies can be broadly classified as intensive or extensive. Extensive studies are carried out
over larger areas than intensive studies and seek to obtain information on the distribution and 
abundance of species for conservation and management purposes. Intensive studies involve the 
repeated observation of a population to gain insight into demographic processes.

##Sequence of steps 
All ecological studies follow a sequence of steps. First the objectives are defined and a 
sampling programme is formulated. Second, the field sampling is undertaken, the
organisms are sorted and identified, and relevant measurements such as size or age are 
recorded. Finally, the data is tabulated and analysed, usually using a computer, and 
the results are reported. Care is required at all stages to ensure that the study 
is realistic given the manpower and other resources available.

## Detailed accounts of the methods available to ecologists
are given in Southwood and Henderson (2000) and the
numerical methods are described in Krebs (1999) and
Legendre and Legendre (1998)

##Absolute vs. Relative population estimates
Absolute - Express population size per unit area or volume. 
Often it is more appropriate to count animals per unit of habitat (per leaf, or per host.)
Such measures are termed population intensity and are more meaningful than absolute number when the
objective is an assessment of crop or host damage.

Relative methods produce some measure of abundance based on the number caught per unit of 
effort or trapping. Relative methods are frequently used when resources are limited,
when it is desired to quickly obtain a general sample of the species present, or when 
the organism is difficult to sample quantitatively. Given constant sampling efficiency,
relative methods can be used to follow population trends or compare abundance between 
habitats. Both absolute andrelative methods will be discussed below.

###THE SAMPLING PROGRAM 
Samples must be taken as it is not possible to count all plants/animals in an area. 
Requires decisions about the subdivision of the habitat, the size of the sampling unit, the number of
samples, the spatial pattern of the samples and the time of sampling. Seasons must be taken into account
Knowledge about the pattern of distribution of the population is particularly relevant.
A preliminary survey may be necessary before the final sampling design is formulated

##Absolute Population Estimates. 
The number of individuals in a fixed unit of habitat must be counted or the population studied by 
mark–recapture, removal sampling or distance sampling methods.

##Distance sampling Methods
In closest-individual methods a point is selected at random and then the area around 
it is searched in concentric rings; the closest individual is found and its
distance from the point is measured. The process should be
continued to find the 2nd, 3rd, _ ith closest individual.
These measurements are then used to calculate an estimate
of the density.

A related technique is nearest-neighbour estimation, in
which an individual is selected at random and the search is
continued until the nearest neighbour is encountered. The
distance between neighbours is then used to calculate
density. A wide variety of techniques based on this method
are used, which may be more robust to nonrandom
distributions. These include angle-order methods in which
the distance to the nearest neighbour in each quadrate is
found.

##Trapping bugs?? 
Traps are frequently used by
animal ecologists and include light traps for night-flying
insects and larval fish, pitfall traps for ground-living
animals such as spiders and beetles, malaise traps for day-
flying insects, traps and tangle nets for fish, and sticky
traps. Traps, like most relative methods, depend on the
activity of the animal and will give misleading information
if some part of the population is inactive. For example,
light traps usually have a variable and unknown level of
efficiency. They may catch different numbers of moths
depending on the weather and the state of the moon.
Further, they may only catch one sex or a limited age range.

##Life Tables and Key Factor Analysis
In intensive studies, the construction of life tables is
important for the understanding of species population
dynamics. The life table shows the pattern of births and
deaths through time. An age-specific life table is based on
the fate of a real cohort, whereas a time-specific life table is
based on the age structure of the population at some
instant in time. The analysis of life tables by methods such
as key factor analysis is used to identify particular stages in
the life cycle that are particularly important in determining
population size. Ecologists frequently seek to identify
processes that result in density-dependent births and
deaths. In a density-dependent process, the magnitude of
the effect changes with the size of the population. Such
processes are important for population stability.
The preparation of life tables often requires organisms to
be aged. For woody plants this can be done from the
growth rings in the trunk. For many animals, growth rings
in hard structures can also be used: for example, fish are
aged by the seasonal growth checks visible on the scales or
otoliths. Similarly, molluscs can show growth bands in the
shell. Damage and wear can be used to estimate the age of
insects and mammals. For example, the development of
and wear on teeth can be used to age mammals. Care must
be taken when using growth checks, as these may also be
caused by irregular events; for example, a drought or
reproduction may also check growth.